Blog - Automating Data Pipelines and Workflows Using Apache Airflow (#438)
earthly/website: blog/_posts/2023-05-29-data-pipelines-with-airflow.md

## Connections and Hooks

![connections]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/connection.png)\

Connections and Hooks are two important concepts in Apache Airflow that enable users to interact with external systems and resources within their workflows.

Connections are a way to define reusable credentials and other settings for external systems, such as databases, APIs, and cloud services. Hooks are a higher-level abstraction over Connections, providing a simplified interface for interacting with external systems from within tasks in a DAG. Hooks allow users to write code that interacts with external systems without having to worry about the underlying details of the connection.

For example, the PostgresHook automatically looks for the Connection with a conn_id of postgres_default if you don't pass one in.

## How to Install Apache Airflow via Docker

It is recommended that you install Docker Desktop.

> It is possible to verify the installation of Docker by executing the following command in the command prompt:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can verify the installation of Docker by executing the following command in the command prompt:
```

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
docker --version
~~~

> To deploy Airflow on Docker Compose, We should fetch docker-compose.yaml by executing the following command in the command prompt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy Airflow on Docker Compose, We should fetch `docker-compose.yaml` by executing the following command in the command prompt.
```

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}

curl -LfO "https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.2.3/docker-compose.yaml"
~~~

> The resulting output should be as shown below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting output should be as shown below:
```

- **flower**: This service runs a separate process that provides a web-based UI for monitoring Airflow tasks and workers. This can be useful for tracking the progress of tasks and troubleshooting issues.

All these services allow you to run Airflow with CeleryExecutor. These services can all be important components of an Airflow deployment, depending on the specific needs and requirements of the project. The database and message broker services are particularly critical for Airflow to function properly, while the triggerer and Flower services can provide additional functionality for managing and monitoring workflows.

Some directories in the container are mounted, which means that their contents are synchronized between your computer and the container.

- ./dags - you can put your DAG files here.
- ./logs - contains logs from task execution and scheduler.
- ./plugins - you can put your custom plugins here.

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
mkdir -p ./dags ,  ./logs , ./plugins
~~~

Airflow instance can now be initialized using the 'airflow-init' service

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
docker-compose up airflow-init
~~~

>  The resulting output should be as shown below. Exited with code 0 means it's deployed successfully. You may get a warning that AIRFLOW_UID is not set, but you can ignore it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The resulting output should be as shown below. Exited with code 0 means it's deployed successfully. You may get a warning that `AIRFLOW_UID` is not set, but you can ignore it.
```

<div class="wide">
![airflow-init]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/xxNP2Vp.png)
</div>

Now that all the related services have been initialized, it's time to run Airflow.

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
docker-compose up -d
~~~

The resulting output should be as shown below

<div class="wide">
![docker-compose up output]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/Fc0VASw.png)
</div>

> To check if the airflow service is running, Execute the following command in the command prompt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check if the Airflow service is running, execute the following command in the command prompt:
```

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
docker ps
~~~

The resulting output should be as shown below:

<div class="wide">
![docker ps output]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/w7WtevZ.png)
</div>

> Open a web browser and enter the following localhost URL: <http://localhost:8080>. Set the username "airflow" and the password "airflow"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a web browser and enter the following localhost URL: <http://localhost:8080>. Set the username "airflow" and the password "airflow":
```

<div class="wide">
![Apache Airflow Interface]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/iDSiwrt.png)
</div>

Finally, Apache Airflow is up as shown below

<div class="wide">
![Apache Airflow up]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/7h0VQhG.png)
</div>

## Running ETL Pipelines With Airflow

Let's take an example of how Airflow can be used to automate a data processing pipeline.

Let's say you work at a retail company, and your team is responsible for processing and analyzing sales data.

Your team has a defined process for this task that includes the following steps:

- **Download**: Download the file from the [URL](https://cf-courses-data.s3.us.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/IBM-DB0250EN-SkillsNetwork/labs/Apache%20Airflow/Build%20a%20DAG%20using%20Airflow/web-server-access-log.txt) located here.
- **Extract**: Extract two columns from the file downloaded in the previous task.
- **Transform**: Transform the extracted columns to be all lowercase.
-**Load**: Compress the transformed and extracted data.

> You can get the full DAG Python code through this [GitHub link](https://github.com/ansamAY/airflow/blob/main/ETL_DAG_Code.py)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get the full DAG Python code at this [GitHub link](https://github.com/ansamAY/airflow/blob/main/ETL_DAG_Code.py)
```

Now we can start writing DAG code:

### 1. Import Libraries

> Import the necessary modules and packages, including the `DAG` class from Airflow, the `BashOperator` class, and the days_ago and timedelta functions from Airflow's dates module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Import the necessary modules and packages, including the `DAG` class from Airflow, the `BashOperator` class, and the `days_ago` and `timedelta` functions from Airflow's `dates` module.
```

~~~{.python caption="ETL_DAG_Code.py"}
from airflow import DAG
from datetime import timedelta
from airflow.utils.dates import days_ago
from airflow.operators.bash_operator import BashOperator
~~~

### 2. Set Up Default Arguments

Default arguments are a key component of defining DAGs in Airflow. These arguments provide a way to specify common settings and behaviors for all tasks in a DAG, such as the start date, email notifications, retries, and other properties. By setting default arguments, you can avoid having to repeat the same settings for each individual task and ensure that all tasks in a DAG are configured consistently.

~~~{.python caption="ETL_DAG_Code.py"}
default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'start_date': datetime(2018, 9, 1),
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'schedule_interval': '@daily',
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(seconds=5),
}
~~~

> In the above snippet:
> 
> - **Owner**: Specifies the owner of the DAG. This is typically the name of the person or team responsible for maintaining the DAG.
> - **Depends_on_past**: Specifies whether a task instance should depend on the success of the previous task instance.
> - **Start_date**: Specifies the date and time when the DAG should start running.
> - **Email_on_failure**: Specifies whether to send an email notification when a task fails.
> - **Email_on_retry**: Specifies whether to send an email notification when a task is retried.
> - **Schedule_interval**: The frequency with which the task should run. In this case, it is set to run once per day.
> - **Retries**: Specifies the number of times to retry a failed task.
> - **Retry_delay**: Specifies the delay between retries. In this case, we're using a delay of 5 seconds.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above snippet:

- `owner`: Specifies the owner of the DAG. This is typically the name of the person or team responsible for maintaining the DAG.
- `depends_on_past`: Specifies whether a task instance should depend on the success of the previous task instance.
- `start_date`: Specifies the date and time when the DAG should start running.
- `email_on_failure`: Specifies whether to send an email notification when a task fails.
- `email_on_retry`: Specifies whether to send an email notification when a task is retried.
- `schedule_interval`: The frequency with which the task should run. In this case, it is set to run once per day.
- `retries`: Specifies the number of times to retry a failed task.
- `retry_delay`: Specifies the delay between retries. In this case, we're using a delay of 5 seconds.

```

Author: @balapriyac by doing the first letter small it gives a lint error.

### 3. Define the DAG

In this step we will define the dag. And it will include:

- `dag_id`: A unique identifier for the DAG. In this case, it is set to `ETL_DAG`.
- `default_args`: A dictionary containing default values for various configuration options related to the DAG. These options were previously defined in the default_args dictionary that we discussed in the previous section.
- `description`: An optional string that describes the purpose of the DAG. In this case, it is set to `ETL DAG using Bash`.
- `schedule_interval`: The frequency with which the DAG should run. In this case, it is set to run once per day, as indicated by the timedelta(days=1) argument.

~~~{.python caption="ETL_DAG_Code.py"}
dag = DAG(
    dag_id='ETL_DAG',
    default_args=default_args,
    description='ETL DAG using Bash',
    schedule_interval=timedelta(days=1),
)
~~~

### 4. Define the Tasks

In this step, we will define the tasks that make up the ETL workflow. Each task will include:

> - A task_id string that uniquely identifies the task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A `task_id` string that uniquely identifies the task.
```

- The Bash command that the task should execute.
- The DAG that the task belongs to, as defined in the previous steps.

~~~{.python caption="ETL_DAG_Code.py"}
#Download the file from the URL located
download=BashOperator(
    task_id='download',
    bash_command='curl "https://cf-courses-data.s3.us.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/IBM-DB0250EN-SkillsNetwork/labs/Apache%20Airflow/Build%20a%20DAG%20using%20Airflow/web-server-access-log.txt"  > /opt/airflow/dags/web_server_log.txt',
    dag=dag,
)
~~~

> As you can see below, `web_server_log.txt` file has been downloaded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see below, `web_server_log.txt` file has been downloaded:
```

<div class="wide">
![web_server_log.txt]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/RISGSc5.png)
</div>

And the `web_server_log.txt` file contains many columns like timestamp, latitude, longitude, visitorid, and so on as shown below

<div class="wide">
![Web Server log columns]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/ymAJw53.jpg)
</div>

> We will extract two columns (timestamp,visitorId) from the file downloaded. So we will use the bash command to extract the two columns and create a new file with the name `web_server_log_extracted.txt`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will extract two columns (`timestamp`,`visitorId`) from the file downloaded. So we will use the bash command to extract the two columns and create a new file with the name `web_server_log_extracted.txt`
```

~~~{.python caption="ETL_DAG_Code.py"}
#Extract two columns from the file downloaded
extract=BashOperator(
    task_id='extract',
    bash_command='cut -f1,4 -d"#" \
    /opt/airflow/dags/web_server_log.txt > \
    /opt/airflow/dags/web_server_log_extracted.txt',
    dag=dag,
)
~~~

As you can see below, `web_server_log_extracted.txt` file has been created with the extracted columns.

<div class="wide">
![web_server_log_extracted.txt]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/LCyiQR3.jpg)
</div>

Now we will transform the extracted columns to be all lowercase and create a new file with the transformed data.

~~~{.python caption="ETL_DAG_Code.py"}
#Transform the extracted columns to be all lowercase
transform=BashOperator(
    task_id='transform',
    bash_command='tr  "[A-Z]" "[a-z]"  < \
    /opt/airflow/dags/web_server_log_extracted.txt > \
    /opt/airflow/dags/Transformed.txt',
    dag=dag,
)
~~~

As you can see below, `Transformed.txt` file has been created with the transformed columns.

<div class="wide">
![Transformed.txt]({{site.images}}{{page.slug}}/bjdcytd.jpg)
</div>

> The last step is to compress the transformed and extracted data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last step is to compress the transformed and extracted data.
```

~~~{.python caption="ETL_DAG_Code.py"}

with DAG('parallel_execution', start_date=datetime(2023, 3, 29), \
schedule_interval=None) as dag:

    download_task_1 = PythonOperator(
        task_id='download_task_1',
        python_callable=download_data_from_source,
        op_kwargs={'source': 'source_1'}
    )
    download_task_2 = PythonOperator(
        task_id='download_task_2',
        python_callable=download_data_from_source,
        op_kwargs={'source': 'source_2'}
    )
    download_task_3 = PythonOperator(
        task_id='download_task_3',
        python_callable=download_data_from_source,
        op_kwargs={'source': 'source_3'}
    )
    
    merge_task = PythonOperator(
        task_id='merge_task',
        python_callable=merge_data,
        provide_context=True
    )
    [download_task_1, download_task_2, download_task_3] >> merge_task
~~~

> The three download tasks can be executed in parallel since they don't have any dependencies on each other. The merge_task is downstream of all three download tasks, and can only be executed after they have all been completed successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The three download tasks can be executed in parallel since they don't have any dependencies on each other. The `merge_task` is downstream of all three download tasks, and can only be executed after they have all been completed successfully.
```
